<html>
    <head></head>
    <body>
        <h1>Chapter 3: From Concept to Fable</h1>
        <h2>The Evolution of Dune</h2>

        <p>
            Herbert's success with <i>Under Pressure</i> was only a shadow of what was to come with his second novel, <i>Dune</i>. Winner of both
            the Hugo and Nebula awards, it is considered by many to be the greatest work of science fiction ever written.
        </p>

        <p>
            Recalling the origins of <i>Dune</i>, Herbert says:
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>
                It began with a concept: to do a long novel about the messianic convulsions which periodically inflict themselves on
                human societies. I had this idea that superheros were disastrous for humans.
            </i>
        </p>

        <p>
            This concern with the dangers of hero worship is already evident in Under Pressure. Ramsey's rejection of the
            paternalism of psychology and his analysis of the subtug crew's dependency on their captain anticipates features of
            Dune's portrayal of the human love affair with messiahs and supermen. Nonetheless it was no easy jump from the tight
            little world of the Fenian Ram to the parched wastes of Arrakis. It took eight years for Herbert's insights to gain mass
            and momentum and to become focused in a single story. His methodical newspaper research habits carried over to his
            fiction. He created a file folder on the idea, and accumulated notes on possible scenes and characters to go along with
            it. For years he researched the origins and history of religions, trying to understand the psychology by which
            individuals submit themselves to the juggernaut of a messianic myth. He continued to study psychoanalysis and
            philosophy, and added history, linguistics, economics and politics, trying to grasp the whole pattern. The initial
            concept had several incarnations before he finally settled on the story that was to become Dune.
        </p>

        <p>
            The perfect scene came to him in 1957, after a newspaper assignment took him to Florence, Oregon, to write a feature
            story about a government project on the control of sand dunes. This program, which used an ecological rather than an
            engineering approach to the problem, was so successful that it had attracted considerable attention and was being copied
            in many other countries. Herbert became fascinated by sand dunes—the irresistible way they move, swallowing roads,
            houses, and on occasion entire towns. He saw real drama in the effort to control dunes by planting hardy grasses instead
            of building walls. The article was never published, but Herbert was hooked, both on ecology and on sand:
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>
                I had far too much for an article and far too much for a short story. So I didn't know really what I had—but I had an
                enormous amount of data and avenues shooting off at all angles to get more… I finally saw that I had something
                enormously interesting going for me about the ecology of deserts, and it was, for a science-fiction writer anyway, an
                easy step from that to think: What if I had an entire planet that was desert?
            </i>
        </p>

        <p>
            Science fiction was the key. It was a medium Herbert had chosen for the elbow room it gives. A writer of conventional
            fiction, unless he is extremely inventive, starts with innumerable givens. His plot must wend its way through them like
            a road through the contours of a mountain pass. But a science-fiction writer, if he really uses his medium, need take
            nothing for granted. He is not creating a road but an entire world—mountains, pass, and all. The problems of sand dune
            control and desert life that so fascinated Herbert could be explored in fullness.
        </p>

        <p>
            He imagined an entire planet that had been taken over by sand dunes, and an ecologist faced with the task of reclaiming
            it. There too the project begins with grass planted on the slipface of the dunes. Then gradually other life is
            introduced in an attempt to start a self-sustaining cycle. Such literal extrapolation from the Oregon dune project was
            only the beginning, however. An important ecological principle cited by Herbert states that "growth is limited by that
            necessity which is present in the least amount." In Arrakis, Herbert "set a planet where water is not available to the
            extent that it becomes the controlling element" for this "law of the minimum." Somewhere on the planet, though, there
            must be water. It can be only hidden, not completely absent, if the transformation is to be possible. Imagination again
            gave the answer: the aridity of the planet is the result of an evolutionary transformation brought about by Arrakis's
            own life forms. An immature stage of a great predator, the sandworm, traps water and establishes the barren conditions
            required by its mature stage. The foreign plants introduced to control the dunes must also be poisonous to these "water
            stealers" if the plants are to free up moisture for an effective long-term change.
        </p>

        <p>
            However, the sandworms are the planet's chief source of oxygen, so they must be treated with care. "A medium worm (about
            200 meters long) discharged as much oxygen into the air as ten-kilometers of green-growing photosynthesis surface,"
            notes the planetologist in Dune. To complicate the situation even further, the desert is the source of the precious
            spice, melange, the most valuable commodity in the Empire, found only on Arrakis. Although this fact is unknown to
            outsiders, melange too is a byproduct of the sandworm life cycle.
        </p>

        <p>
            Herbert invented this spice through a natural branching of ideas: for people to live in a really extreme environment
            (apart from a few scattered groups on the subsistence level), there must be something to attract them, something so
            valuable that they seek out the locale despite its hostility. This insight was a product of his study (begun in Under
            Pressure) of the psychology of dangerously extreme environments, where human beings cannot control their circumstances
            but are forced to adapt to them.
        </p>

        <p>
            The spice added further dimensions to the ecological problem. Water is poisonous to sandworms, and so water and melange
            are mutually exclusive riches on Arrakis. The desert cannot be treated simply as an obstacle or an evil to be converted
            to man's use. It is the planet's greatest resource—one with which men tamper at their peril. There must be a common
            evolution of the Arrakeen and terraform ecosystems, so that the two may be integrated rather than set at odds. The
            delicacy of the ecological transformation is multiplied a thousandfold. One begins to see, as the ecologist in Dune
            says, that "you cannot draw neat lines around planet-wide problems." Ecology deals not with isolated effects, but with
            systems. The whole pattern must work, or eventually none of it will. Even ecological technology, indiscriminately
            applied, can fall prey to short-term, simplistic thinking when one element, such as water, is taken out of context and
            made all-important.
        </p>

        <p>
            From these scattered beginnings, Herbert constructed a painstakingly detailed world, in an exercise of ecological
            imagination as gradual, as delicate, and as complex as such a planetary transformation itself might be. Not the least
            part of his task was to imagine inhabitants for this greatest of deserts. Herbert "assumed that if people had lived
            there long enough, there had been an organic, evolutionary process which produced people who know how to survive there."
            These are the Fremen, who, as befits such a harsh world, are a composite of the most striking qualities of all of
            earth's desert dwellers. For their approach to desert survival, Herbert drew heavily on the water-lore of the primitives
            of the Kalahari, who eke out a living in an utter wasteland by utilizing every drop of water. This was given a
            science-fiction twist in the imagined technology of the water-conserving "stillsuit," which reclaims the body's
            moisture:
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>
                It's basically a micro-sandwich—a high efficiency filter and heat-exchange system… The skin-contact layer's porous.
                Perspiration passes through it, having cooled the body… Reclaimed water circulates to catchpockets from which you draw
                it through this tube in the clip at your neck.
            </i>
        </p>

        <p>
            For the Fremen character, Herbert relied heavily on the Indians of the American Southwest and the nomads of North Africa
            and the Arabian peninsula. Like the Apache, the Fremen are among the finest guerrilla warriors ever known. They have
            been driven into inhospitable regions by foreign enemies with superior numbers and armament. But their superb knowledge
            of their environment makes them virtually unbeatable on that ground. They are masters of those weapons that nature has
            given them—they have fierce endurance, physical strength, bravery, and a kind of earth-wisdom. And like the Navajo and
            other Indians of the Southwest, their native religion involves a psychedelic sacrament.
        </p>

        <p>
            Still more obvious in the Fremen character are the Arabic roots. Fanatically loyal to brethren but with little respect
            for the lives of those outside the clan, nomadic, warlike, respectful of troubadours and mystics, the Fremen are close
            kin to the seventh-century Bedouin. The overt trappings of their culture—language, clothing, and customs—are Arabic in
            detail. Even the drug use of the Fremen reflects an Arabic (as well as Indian) source, in the twelfth-century
            Hashishins.
        </p>

        <p>
            Herbert used these cultures as models for the Fremen but one should not look too deeply for historical parallels. For
            instance, he describes the use of Arabic derivations for the Fremen language primarily as a means of focusing the
            reader's imagination:
        </p>

        <p>
            If you want to give the reader the solid impression that he is not here and now, but that something of here and now has
            been carried to that faraway place and time, what better way to say to our culture that this is so than to give him the
            language of that place.. . . That oral tool—it has its own inertial forces; it's mind-shaping as well as used by mind.
        </p>

        <p>
            In short, Herbert was using the nuances of language to key his readers into their own associations with desert.
            Furthermore, he did not presume that Arabic history had simply repeated itself in the Fremen culture. He fictionalized a
            history in which many of the original elements of Near Eastern civilization have been preserved, though greatly changed
            through time, to flower again in a desert setting.
        </p>

        <p>
            The Fremen borrowings from the Arabic are of two kinds: those features that might be re-created by similarities of
            environment, such as the codes of honor, personal bravery and survival skill; and cultural information, such as
            language, which might actually have survived. This legitimizes the reader's use of his own knowledge to flesh out the
            story and allowed Herbert to mix the familiar with the strange, to powerful effect.
        </p>

        <p>
            As he played with the possibilities, Herbert saw how the two stories he was developing—about the desert world and about
            the superhero mystique—could come together. He says:
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>
                I decided to put the two together because I don't think any story should have only one thread. I build on a layer
                technique, and of course putting in religion and religions ideas with ecological ideas you can play one against another.
            </i>
        </p>

        <p>
            In his research Herbert had noted how the desert seems to be a wellspring of religion. The history of Judaism
            demonstrates that harsh conditions make for a religion of anticipation. And Islam, which we tend to associate more than
            any other faith with a desert environment, is perhaps the most messianic religion of all. In an appendix to Dune that
            purports to be a fragment from a future-historical monograph, Herbert writes:
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>
                It is vital… that you never lose sight of one fact: the Fremen were a desert people whose entire ancestry was accustomed
                to hostile landscapes. Mysticism isn't difficult when you survive each moment by surmounting open hostility.
            </i>
        </p>

        <p>
            Like the Jews, the Fremen have long been wandering and persecuted, always awaiting the promised land. And like the
            Arabs, the scattered Fremen discover their religious and cultural identity at the call of a strong leader, and build a
            mystical warrior-religion moved by economic as well as religious factors.
        </p>

        <p>
            It was noted above that Islam may be the most messianic of all religions. Islam has been rocked with continual Mahdist
            movements since its foundation. To name one recent example, the political imbroglio involving T. E. Lawrence had
            profound messianic overtones. If Lawrence had been killed at a crucial point in the struggle, Herbert notes, he might
            well have become a new "avatar" for the Arabs. The Lawrence analogy suggested to Herbert the possibility for
            manipulation of the messianic impulses within a culture by outsiders with ulterior purposes. He also realized that
            ecology could become the focus of just such a messianic episode, here and now, in our own culture. "It might become the
            new banner for a deadly crusade—an excuse for a witch hunt or worse.
        </p>

        <p>
            Herbert pulled all these strands together in an early version of Dune. It was a story about a hero very like Lawrence of
            Arabia, an outsider who went native and used religious fervor to fuel his own ambitions—in this case, to transform the
            ecology of the planet. His plan to reclaim the desert will take hundreds of years. No one then alive will see the
            fruition of his plan. It is a traditional, future-oriented prophetic pattern.
        </p>

        <p>
            Somewhere along the line, Herbert saw the limits of this approach: it touched on only one of the dynamics uncovered in
            his research. He had a great many ideas about psychology, the manipulation of power, and the unconscious dynamics of
            mass movements. So straightforward a plot would be inadequate to carry everything he wanted to say. He began to layer
            the story.
        </p>

        <p>
            Enter Paul Atreides, the hero of Dune. He is not merely a prophet, but a here-and-now messiah with more than a visionary
            dream with which to inspire a following. The tale of Kynes, the ecological prophet of the earlier version, is retained
            as a sub-theme: he plays John the Baptist to Paul's Jesus. Paul takes over the ecological cause when he comes to
            Arrakis, but he has other axes to grind as well—as did Herbert. In Paul, Herbert had a vehicle to explore the many
            factors that go into the creation of a messianic "superhero." He also lays out in detail the structure of aristocratic
            leadership, the use of psychological manipulation, the birth of an irresistible legend from individually insignificant
            events, and an unusual psychogenetic theory of history.
        </p>

        <p>
            Dune does not begin in the desert. Its first scenes concern the political structure of the Empire. The Empire is ruled,
            in effect, by an "aristocratic bureaucracy" at the top of a rigid feudal caste system. It is said that there is "a place
            for every man, and every man in his place." Paul's father, Duke Leto, hawk-featured and imperious, is a peer of the
            Galactic Empire and a born leader. Leto is forced to Arrakis, the dune world, in a "change of fief" by his hereditary
            enemy, the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen. Arrakis is a rich planet, but dangerous, and the Baron plans to move against Leto
            while he is still unsure of his new ground. Harkonnen has the secret backing of the Emperor, who fears that Leto's
            superb cadres excel even his own crack troops, the Sardaukar. Leto is betrayed and killed soon after his arrival, and
            Paul is forced to flee to the desert with the Lady Jessica, his mother.
        </p>

        <p>
            The feudal and paramilitary structure of the Empire and House Atreides reveals an important aspect of what Herbert
            describes as the superhero mystique. Feudalism is a natural condition into which men fall, he contends, a situation in
            which some men lead and others, surrendering the responsibility to make their own decisions, follow orders. Duke Leto is
            generous, bold-hearted, and loved fiercely by all who follow him. Even his enemies admire him:
        </p>

        <p>
            This Duke was concerned more over the men than he was over the spice. He risked his own life and that of his son to save
            the men. He passed off the loss of a spice-crawler with a gesture. The threat to men's lives had him in a rage. A leader
            such as that would command fanatic loyalty. He would be difficult to defeat.
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>Against his own will and all previous judgments, Kynes admitted to himself: </i> I like this Duke.
        </p>

        <p>
            Still, Leto uses his men. It is always for his purposes, not their own, that they act. They are maintained—and maintain
            themselves—as followers, not as equals.
        </p>

        <p>
            The early part of the novel, up to Leto's downfall, depicts Paul's training in the Atreides code. Charisma and loyalty,
            as well as the fear and propaganda wielded by the Baron Harkonnen, are shown to be the tools of statecraft. Herbert
            later described what he was getting at in this part of the book:
        </p>

        <p>
            You gain insights into the moral base upon which Paul makes his own decisions. All of this is couched in a form which
            makes Paul and his people admirable. I am their advocate. But don't lose sight of the fact that House Atreides acts with
            the same arrogance toward "common folk" as do their enemies I am showing you the superhero syndrome and your own
            participation in it. The arrogant are, in part, created by the meek.
        </p>

        <p>
            This then is the first layer of the superhero mystique: the hierarchical structure of leadership. Paul is trained to
            lead and his followers are trained to follow.
        </p>

        <p>
            At the same time as Herbert was delineating the social structure of the Empire, he was introducing another layer. In the
            opening scene of the novel, while Paul is still a boy of fifteen he is tested by a mysterious old woman to see if he is
            human or animal. The "gom jabbar," a needle tipped with deadly poison, is held at his throat while his hand is burned,
            causing dreadful pain. "This is the only rule," she tells him. "Keep your hand in the box and live. Withdraw it and
            die." Paul must be in complete command of his animal reflexes or perish. Such is the initiation of the Bene Gesserit
            Sisterhood, a semisecret organization of women devoted to the devious manipulation of politics and religion. Through the
            Bene Gesserit, Herbert analyzes the role of the unconscious in human affairs and the potential for its manipulation by
            the knowledgeable and unscrupulous. Most people are only half-awake—they react to external stimuli without really
            knowing why they respond the way they do. By contrast, the Bene Gesserit have schooled themselves to understand and
            master their own unconscious reflexes. This is graphically demonstrated in the test of the gom jabbar, as well as in
            other fantastic feats of psychological and physiological control, which are described throughout the book. In addition,
            the Bene Gesserit have refined the ability to perceive and to play on the unconscious weaknesses of others. Their power
            to influence the course of politics depends almost entirely on this ability, applied both to individuals and to groups.
        </p>

        <p>
            The Bene Gesserit command over the individual unconscious finds its acutest expression in the power of Voice:
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>
                Hawat started to leap from his chair.
            </i>
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>
                The old Mentat almost fell back in his chair, so quickly did his muscles betray him… Hawat tried to swallow in a dry
                throat. Her command had been regal, peremptory—uttered in a tone and manner he had found completely irresistible. His
                body had obeyed her before he could think about it. Nothing could have prevented his response—not logic, not passionate
                anger… nothing. To do what she had done spoke of a sensitive, intimate knowledge of the person thus commanded, a depth
                of control he had not dreamed possible.
            </i>
        </p>

        <p>
            <i>
                "Now you know something of the real training they give us," she said.
            </i>
        </p>

        <p>
            The significance of Voice is easy to miss if we get caught up in the question of whether or not such a thing is
            possible. Herbert is extrapolating powers of suggestion and psychological manipulation far in advance of anything in use
            today, but the power itself is not the main point. He is saying something about who we are as human animals. In Western
            civilization we have placed so much emphasis on conscious thought and rationality that we have forgotten how much of our
            behavior is unintentional and uncontrolled by consciousness. We make choices for reasons of the flesh and feelings, as
            well as of the mind. The attraction of the superhero, as Herbert sees it, is a case in point. The Fremen do not follow
            Paul for logical reasons, but precisely because logic is not enough for comfort in a hostile world. Unconscious needs
            for security and belonging play a much larger role in a messianic upheaval than the conscious content that masquerades
            as the cause.
        </p>

        <p>
            The Bene Gesserit know that the power to manipulate an individual, however acute, has limited effect on millions. They
            use legends and superstitions as the mass equivalent to the power of Voice. Their adepts have planted stories on
            countless planets as insurance against future need. With such a legend for background, someone trained as the Bene
            Gesserit are trained can easily move an entire world.
        </p>

    </body>
</html>