<html>
<head></head>
<body>
    <h1>Preface</h1>
    <blockquote><i>If you say, “I understand”… you have made a value judgement.</i> — Whipping Star</blockquote>

    <p>The highest praise that can be given to an author is to say that his work awakens unexpected possibilities of
        thought
        and feeling. I have written about Frank Herbert from this perspective. His work has touched me, and I have
        learned from
        him.</p>

    <p>To my mind, the most fundamental judgment to be made about a novel is not as a work of art built to abstract
        standards,
        but as an act of communication. What does it say to the reader? How does it touch him?</p>

    <p>The job of a book like this is not to criticize but to illuminate and intensify an author's statement, chiefly by
        juxtaposing a wider range of material than would be apparent to a casual reader. The juxtaposition here includes
        material from all of Herbert's work—his essays, letters, poetry, and short stories, as well as his novels—and
        from
        extensive personal interviews with him.</p>

    <p>Such an illumination is particularly appropriate with the Dune trilogy, since it is many-layered and its
        imaginative
        span is too great to be grasped all at once. The impact of the story is felt, but its meaning is not always
        understood.</p>

    <p>One criticism that I have made of Herbert throughout this book is that he walks a narrow line between
        entertainment and
        didacticism. In his best work, such as Dune, the story itself is the message; the concepts are so completely a
        part of
        the imaginative world he has created that the issue of didacticism never arises. Ideas are there to be found by
        the
        thoughtful reader, but one never stumbles over them. Other works, however, are sometimes unnecessarily obscure.
        Herbert's shorter novels in particular lack the development of story and character to support the weight of the
        ideas
        they contain.</p>

    <p>Even so, these shorter novels well repay detailed study. I have found that the more I know about Herbert's work
        as a
        whole, the more I am able to enjoy works such as Destination: Void and The Eyes of Heisenberg. Close reading
        strips away
        the obscurity, allowing the excitement of what Herbert is trying to say to become the source of the reader's
        enjoyment.</p>

    <p>
        One word about the mechanics of this book: notes for all references follow the end of the text and are
        identified by
        page number and a few words from the relevant passage. No superscript numbers appear in the text. This format is
        intended to enhance the readability of this study while retaining the full critical apparatus.
    </p>

    <p>
        A few words of gratitude are also in order. Thanks first of all to Frank Herbert himself, for all the obvious
        reasons;
        to Beverly Herbert, for some invaluable perspectives and for the final word on chronology and other factual
        information;
        to Ralph Slattery, Jack Vance, and Poul Anderson for sharing their memories; to Albert Lord, for his
        perspectives on
        folklore elements in Dune; to Ted Jennings and especially Will McNelly, whose willingness to share their own
        ideas and
        unpublished interview material showed me the best traditions of scholarship.
    </p>

    <p>
        Thanks also to Walt Blum at the San Francisco Examiner, who went out of his way to help me track down articles
        and
        friends Herbert had developed there; to Mrs. John W. Campbell for permission to excerpt portions of her
        husband's
        letters to Herbert; to Linda Herman of the Special Collections Library at the California State University at
        Fullerton,
        for her unfailing help in my, search through the Herbert manuscripts and other papers kept there; to Marty Cohen
        and
        Lynne Conlon, each of whom did legwork for me when time kept me from following up important leads; to my
        business
        partner, Peter Brajer, for biding his time while I finished this book; and to the MIT Science Fiction Society,
        whose
        pooled knowledge and complete collection of science-fiction magazines were so reassuringly close at hand.
    </p>

    <p>
        Finally, thanks to my wife Chris, for her valuable comments and suggestions, and to Dick Riley, my editor, for
        his patience, his appreciation, and his thoughtful pruning.
    </p>
</body>

</html>