<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">

<head>
    <title>Introduction: How I Came to Write Frank Herbert</title>
</head>

<body>
    <h1>Acknowledgements</h1>
    <p>
        The contes of this book are retrieved from the <a href="https://www.oreilly.com/tim/herbert/">O'Reilly Media</a> website. This
        project containts the files which are used to generate the .EPUB file from the book. The EPUB can be found in
        the
        project's directory.
    </p>

    <h1>Introduction: How I Came to Write Frank Herbert</h1>
    <p>In the fall of 1977, when I was a couple of years out of college, I received an
        unexpected call from a friend, Dick Riley. He’d just landed a new job at a small publisher called Frederick
        Ungar, as the editor of a series of short critical monographs on detective and science-fiction writers. He was
        looking for authors, and as he knew I was fond of science fiction, he thought of me. Would I write a book about
        Frank Herbert, he wanted to know.</p>

    <p>I struggled with his proposal, but eventually decided to give it a try. It was a momentous decision, since it was
        in
        undertaking the book that I came to think of myself as a writer. (Ironically, it was the same day that my
        programmer
        friend Peter Brajer asked me to help him rewrite his resume so he could land a job writing a manual—a job that I
        eventually came to help him with, and which led to our partnership not long afterwards.)</p>

    <p>I wrote Frank Herbert over a period of about two years, and it was published in 1981. In the course of writing
        it, I
        read all of Herbert’s novels, stories, and essays, as well as a lot of his newspaper writing (which, by
        coincidence,
        included a stint at the Santa Rosa Press Democrat, the local paper for the region in which I now live.) I
        interviewed
        him several times, and, in a small way, we became friends. His ideas came to influence me deeply. I had always
        loved
        Dune and Dune Messiah, and especially the idea that predicting the future too closely can lead to a kind of
        paralysis.
        But the deeper I went, the more substance I found. Ecology, mysticism, and a kind of hard-headed insistence on
        the
        relativity of human perception and the limits of knowledge combine into a richer mix than is found in a lot of
        science-fiction. There’s some really cool stuff here!</p>

    <p>My goal in writing the book was not to be a "critic", but an enthusiast. I wanted to share the additional
        information
        I’d uncovered, to present it in a way that illuminated Herbert’s work without diminishing it or "dullifying" it.
        In many
        ways, this was the same goal I embraced as a technical writer, to bring transparent assistance to the reader’s
        own
        experience, not to replace it with my own.</p>

    <p>Like many publishing ventures, Ungar’s Recognitions series (as it was called) went largely unrecognized. Ungar
        itself
        was eventually sold to another publisher, Crossroads/Continuum, and the book went out of print, where it has
        remained
        for many years. (The last time I remember getting a royalty statement was in the late 80s.)
    </p>

    <p>From time to time, I get letters from people asking if the book is still available, and I’ve always had to tell
        them no.
        (I have just two copies left myself—one hardcover, the other paperback—having given away my last "extra" just
        last year,
        to none other than Jeff Bezos, when I discovered on our trip to Washington that he was a big Frank Herbert fan!)
    </p>

    <p>Last year, I wrote to Crossroads/Continuum and asked for a reversion of rights to the book so I could put it up
        on the
        Web. My letter went unanswered. Since they didn’t bother to answer, I decided to go ahead and do it anyway,
        figuring, as
        they say, that it’s sometimes easier to get forgiveness than permission. If anyone from Crossroads/Continuum
        notices,
        please give me a call or drop an email. I’d love to see the book back in print, or if not, at least to have your
        blessing on this Web version.
    </p>

    <p>I hope those of you who are Frank Herbert fans will enjoy the book, and that those of you who are not (yet) will
        give
        his books a try. In addition, a few years later, I put together a book with Frank, a collection of his essays
        called The
        Maker of Dune, which was published by Berkely/Putnam. That too is out of print, but since most of the writing in
        it is
        Frank Herbert’s, not mine, I can’t in good conscience pull the same trick of putting it up on the Web. You may
        be able
        to find a used copy somewhere, or, if enough people care about it, perhaps the publisher could be persuaded to
        put it
        back into print. (Actually, I suppose that I could put up the interviews, which I believe I retained copyright
        on, but
        that's a project for another day.)
    </p>

</body>

</html>