<html>

<body>
    <h1>Bibliography</h1>
    <ol>
        <li>
            <h2>Works by Herbert</h2>
            <ol>
                <li>
                    <p><strong>Novels</strong></p>

                    <p><em>Under Pressure</em>. Original title: <em>Dragon in the Sea</em>. New York: Doubleday, 1956;
                        rpt.
                        New York: Ballantine, 1974. Also titled (unauthorized) <em>21st Century Sub</em>.</p>

                    <p><em>Dune</em>. Philadelphia: Chilton Books, 1965; rpt. New York: Berkley Publishing, 1977. Serial
                        publication as "Dune World" and "The Prophet of Dune."</p>

                    <p><em>The Green Brain</em>. New York: Ace Books, 1966. Based on the story "Greenslaves."</p>

                    <p><em>Destination: Void</em>. New York: Berkley Publishing, 1966. Based on the story, "Do I Wake or
                        Dream?"</p>

                    <p><em>The Eyes of Heisenberg</em>. New York: Berkley Publishing, 1966. Serial publication as
                        "Heisenberg's Eyes."</p>

                    <p><em>The Heaven Makers</em>. New York: Avon Books, 1968; rpt. New York: Ballantine Books, 1977.
                    </p>

                    <p><em>The Santaroga Barrier</em>. New York: Berkley Publishing, 1968. <em>Dune Messiah</em>. New
                        York:
                        G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1970; rpt. New York:
                        Berkley Publishing, 1975.</p>

                    <p><em>Whipping Star</em>. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1970; rpt. New York:
                        Berkley Publishing, 1970.</p>

                    <p><em>Soul Catcher</em>. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1972; rpt. New York:
                        Bantam Books, 1973. Herbert's only "mainstream" novel. <em>The Godmakers</em>. New York: G. P.
                        Putnam's Sons, 1972; rpt. New York:
                        Berkley Publishing, 1973. Includes the stories "You Take the High
                        Road," "Missing Link," "Operation Haystack," and "The Priests of
                        Psi" in an altered form, together with some new material. <em>Hellstrom's Hive</em>. Garden
                        City,
                        N.Y.: Doubleday, 1973 (Book Club
                        Edition); rpt. New York: Bantam Books, 1973. Serial publication as "Project 40."</p>

                    <p><em>Children of Dune</em>. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1976; rpt. New York:
                        Berkley Publishing, 1977.</p>

                    <p><em>The Dosadi Experiment</em>. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1977; rpt. New York: Berkley
                        Publishing, 1978.</p>

                    <p><em>The Jesus Incident</em> (with Bill Ransom). New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1979.</p>
                </li>

                <li>
                    <p><strong>Nonfiction</strong></p>

                    <p><em>New World or No World</em>. New York: Ace Books, 1970. A collection of articles prepared for
                        "Earth Day 1970," edited and introduced by Herbert.</p>

                    <p><em>Threshold: The Blue Angels Experience</em>. New York: Ballantine Books, 1973. Contains photos
                        and
                        screenplay from the documentary film.</p>

                </li>

                <li>
                    <p><strong>Short-Story Collections</strong></p>

                    <p><em>The Worlds of Frank Herbert</em>. New York: Ace Books, 1971. Contains:
                        "The Tactful Saboteur," "By the Book," "Committee of the Whole,"
                        "Mating Call,"" Escape Felicity," "The GM Effect," "The Featherbedders," "Old Rambling House,"
                        "A-W-F Unlimited."</p>

                    <p><em>The Book of Frank Herbert</em>. New York: DAW Books, 1973. Contains:
                        "Seed Stock," "The Nothing," "Rat Race," "Gambling Device, "Looking for Something," "The Gone
                        Dogs,"
                        "Passage for Piano," "Encounter in a Lonely Place," "Operation
                        Syndrome," "Occupation Force."</p>

                    <p><em>The Best of Frank Herbert</em>. London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1975. Contains: "Looking for
                        Something," "Nightmare Blues," "Cease Fire,"
                        "Egg and Ashes," "Committee of the Whole," "The Mary Celeste Move," "Solution Primitive," "By
                        the
                        Book," <em>The Heaven Makers</em>, "The Being Machine," "Seed Stock,"
                        <em>Dune</em> excerpts, <em>Dragon in the Sea</em> excerpts.
                    </p>

                </li>

                <li>
                    <p><strong>Short Fiction (Including Serial Publication of Novels)</strong></p>

                    <p>"Survival of the Cunning." <em>Esquire</em>, March 1945.</p>

                    <p>"Yellow Fire." <em>Alaska Life</em> (Alaska Territorial magazine), June 1947.</p>

                    <p>"Looking for Something?" <em>Startling Stories</em>, April 1952.</p>

                    <p>"Operation Syndrome." <em>Astounding</em>, June 1954.</p>

                    <p>"The Tactful Saboteur." <em>Galaxy</em>, Oct. 1964.</p>

                    <p>"The Prophet of Dune" (five installments). <em>Analog</em>, Jan&ndash;May 1965. Comprises Books
                        II
                        and III of <em>Dune</em>.</p>

                    <p>"Greenslaves." <em>Amazing</em>, March 1965. Expanded to form <em>The Green Brain</em>.</p>

                    <p>"Committee of the Whole." <em>Galaxy</em>, April 1965.</p>

                    <p>"The GM Effect." <em>Analog</em>, June 1965.</p>

                    <p>"Do I Wake or Dream?" <em>Galaxy</em>, Aug. 1965. A shortened version of <em>Destination:
                            Void</em>.
                    </p>

                    <p>"The Primitives." <em>Galaxy</em>, April 1966.</p>

                    <p>"Escape Felicity." <em>Analog</em>, June 1966.</p>

                    <p>"Heisenberg's Eyes" (two installments). <em>Galaxy</em>, June&ndash;Aug. 1966. Published in
                        paperback
                        as <em>The Eyes of Heisenberg</em>.</p>

                    <p>"By the Book." <em>Analog</em>, Aug. 1966.</p>

                    <p>"The Featherbedders." <em>Analog</em>, Aug. 1967.</p>

                    <p>"The Heaven Makers" (two installments). <em>Amazing</em>, April&ndash;June 1967.</p>

                    <p>"The Santaroga Barrier" (three installments). <em>Amazing</em>, Oct. 1967&ndash;Feb. 1968.</p>

                    <p>"Dune Messiah" (five installments). <em>Galaxy</em>, July&ndash;Nov. 1969.</p>

                    <p>"The Mind Bomb." <em>Worlds of If</em>, Oct. 1969.</p>

                    <p>"Whipping Star" (three installments). <em>Worlds of If</em>, Jan&ndash;April 1970.</p>

                    <p>"Seed Stock." <em>Analog</em>, April 1970.</p>

                    <p>"Murder Will In." <em>The Magazine of Fantasy and Science-Fiction</em>, May 1970. Part of
                        <em>Five
                            Fates</em>, by Keith Laumer, Poul Anderson, Frank Herbert, Gordon Dickson, and
                        Harlan Ellison. Garden City, N.Y.:
                        Doubleday, 1970. An ingenious collection where five authors complete the same story, each in
                        their
                        own way.</p>

                    <p>"Project 40" (three installments). <em>Galaxy</em>, Nov. 1972&ndash;March 1973. Published in
                        paperback as <em>Hellstrom's Hive</em>.</p>

                    <p>"Encounter in a Lonely Place," in <em>The Book of Frank Herbert</em>. New York: DAW Books, 1973.
                    </p>

                    <p>"Gambling Device," in <em>The Book of Frank Herbert</em>. New York: DAW Books, 1973.</p>

                    <p>"Passage for Piano," in <em>The Book of Frank Herbert</em>. New York: DAW Books, 1973.</p>

                    <p>"The Death of a City," in <em>Future City</em>, ed. Roger Elwood. New York:
                        Trident Press, 1973.</p>

                    <p>"Children of Dune" (four installments). <em>Analog</em>, Jan&ndash;April 1976.</p>

                    <p>"The Dosadi Experiment" (four installments). <em>Galaxy</em>, May&ndash;August 1977.</p>

                    <p>"Come to the Party" (with F. M. Busby). <em>Analog</em>, Dec. 1978.</p>

                    <p>"Songs of a Sentient Flute." <em>Analog</em>, Feb. 1979.</p>

                    <p>"Cease Fire," <em>Astounding Science Fiction</em>, January 1958.</p>

                </li>

                <li>
                    <p><strong>Essays and Introductions</strong></p>

                    <p>"Introduction" to <em>Saving Worlds</em>, ed. Roger Elwood and Virginia Kidd. Garden City, N.Y.:
                        Doubleday, 1973. (Reissued by Bantam Books under the title <em>The Wounded Planet</em>.)</p>

                    <p>"Introduction: Tomorrow's Alternatives?" in <em>Frontiers 1: Tomorrow's Alternatives</em>, ed.
                        Roger
                        Elwood. New York: Macmillan, 1973.</p>

                    <p>"Introduction" to <em>Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow</em>, by Heitz, Herbert and Joor McGee.
                        New
                        York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1973.</p>

                    <p>"Listening to the Left Hand." <em>Harper's Magazine</em>, Dec. 1973.</p>

                    <p>"Science Fiction and a World in Crisis" in <em>Science Fiction: Today and Tomorrow</em>, ed.
                        Reginald
                        Bretnor. New York: Harper and Row, 1974.</p>

                    <p>"Men on Other Planets" in <em>The Craft of Science Fiction</em>, ed. Reginald Bretnor. New York:
                        Harper and Row, 1976.</p>

                    <p>"Dune: The Banquet Scene." Liner notes for <em>Dune: The Banquet Scene</em>, Read by the Author.
                        New
                        York: Caedmon Records, 1977.</p>

                    <p>"The Sky Is Going to Fall in <em>Seriatim: The Journal of Ecotopia</em>, No. 2, Spring 1977 (425
                        3rd
                        St., McMinnville, Oregon 97128). A slightly different version of this article
                        appeared in <em>The San Francisco Examiner</em>, "Overview" column, July 4,1976.</p>

                    <p>"The ConSentiency and How it Got That Way." <em>Galaxy</em>, May 1977.</p>

                    <p>"Sandworms of Dune." Liner notes for <em>Sandworms of Dune: Read by the Author</em>. New York:
                        Caedmon Records, 1978.</p>

                </li>

                <li>
                    <p><strong>Poetry</strong></p>

                    <p>"Carthage: Reflections of a Martian" in <em>Mars, We Love You</em>, ed. Jane Hipolito and Willis
                        E.
                        McNelly. New York: Doubleday, 1971.</p>

                </li>

                <li>
                    <p><strong>Newspaper Articles</strong></p>

                    <p>Herbert was a newspaperman for many years. While the entire corpus of his newspaper career is
                        nearly
                        impossible to track down, the following articles might be of interest:</p>

                    <p>"Flying Saucers: Fact or Farce?" <em>San Francisco Sunday Examiner</em>, "People", Oct. 20, 1963.
                    </p>

                    <p>"2068 AD." <em>San Francisco Sunday Examiner &amp; Chronicle</em>, "California Living", July 28,
                        1968.</p>

                    <p>"We're Losing the Smog War" (part. 1). <em>San Francisco Sunday Examiner &amp; Chronicle</em>,
                        "California Living", Dec. 1, 1968.</p>

                    <p>"Lying to Ourselves about Air" (part. 2). <em>San Francisco Sunday Examiner &amp; Chronicle</em>,
                        "California Living", Dec. 8, 1968.</p>

                    <p>"You Can Go Home Again." <em>San Francisco Sunday Examiner &amp; Chronicle</em>, "California
                        Living",
                        March 29, 1970. Refers to some of Herbert's childhood experiences in the
                        Northwest.</p>

                    <p>"Overview," <em>San Francisco Sunday Examiner &amp; Chronicle</em>, July 4,
                        1976.</p>

                    <p>"New Lifestyle to Fit a World of Shortages." <em>San Francisco Sunday Examiner &amp;
                            Chronicle</em>,
                        March 25, 1977.</p>

                </li>
            </ol>

        <li>
            <h2>Works about Herbert</h2>
            <ol>
                <li>
                    <p><strong>Articles</strong></p>

                    <p>Ower, John. "Idea and Imagery in Herbert's <em>Dune</em>." <em>Extrapolation</em> 15, May 1974.
                    </p>

                    <p>Parkinson, Robert C. "<em>Dune</em>&ndash;An Unfinished Tetralogy." <em>Extrapolation</em> 13,
                        December 1971.</p>

                    <p>Stover, L. E. "Is Jaspers Beer Good for You? Mass Society and Counter Culture in Herbert's
                        <em>Santaroga Barrier</em>." <em>Extrapolation</em> 17, May 1976.
                    </p>
                </li>

                <li>
                    <p><strong>Profiles and Interviews</strong></p>

                    <p>Drewes, Caroline. "Forecasts of an Inventor of the Future." <em>San Francisco Sunday Examiner
                            &amp;
                            Chronicle</em>, July 18, 1976.</p>

                    <p>Webb, Burt. "The Herbert Homestead," in <em>Seriatim: The Journal of Ecotopia</em>, No. 2, Spring
                        1977 (425 3rd St., McMinnville, Oregon 97128).</p>

                    <p>Williams, Paul. "A Visit with Frank Herbert," in <em>Ariel: The Book of Fantasy</em>, vol. 3, ed.
                        Thomas Durwood. New York: Ballantine Books, 1978.</p>
                </li>

                <li>
                    <p><strong>Other</strong></p>

                    <p>Yenter, Charles C. "Notes for a Bibliography of Frank Herbert." Privately published. 1015 5.
                        Steele,
                        Tacoma, Washington 98405. Thorough listing of
                        editions of Herbert's work; incomplete only by a bibliophile's standard.</p>
                </li>
            </ol>
        </li>

        <li>
            <h2>Other Works Cited</h2>

            <p>Blake, William. <em>Complete Writings</em>, ed. Geoffrey Keynes. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971.
            </p>

            <p>Brock, Werner. "An Account of 'Being and Time,"' in <em>Existence and Being</em> by Martin Heidegger.
                Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1970.</p>

            <p>Campbell, Joseph. <em>The Hero with a Thousand Faces</em>. Bollingen Series xvii, second edition.
                Princeton,
                N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1968.</p>

            <p>Carlyle, Thomas. <em>Heroes, Hero Worship, and the Heroic in History</em> (1841). New York: A. L. Burt,
                Ca.
                1910.</p>

            <p>Clarke, Arthur C. <em>Profiles of the Future</em>. New York: Bantam, 1964. Delany, Samuel R. <em>The
                    Jewel-Hinged Jaw</em>. New York: Berkley Publishing, 1977.</p>

            <p>Emboden, William, Jr. "Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L.," in <em>Flesh of the Gods</em>, ed. Peter T.
                Furst.
                New York: Frederick Praeger, 1972.</p>

            <p>Franson, Donald, and Howard DeVore. <em>A History of the Hugo, Nebula and International Fantasy
                    Awards</em>.
                Dearborn, Mich.: Misfit Press, 1978.</p>

            <p>Herrigel, Eugene. <em>The Method of Zen</em>, ed. Hermann Tausend, trans. R. F. C. Hull. New York:
                Vintage
                Books, 1960.</p>

            <p>Huxley, Aldous. <em>The Doors of Perception</em>. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1954.</p>

            <p>Jaspers, Karl. <em>Way to Wisdom</em>. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1960.</p>

            <p>Kaufman, Walter. <em>Tragedy and Philosophy</em>. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1968.</p>

            <p>Korzybski, Alfred. <em>Science and Sanity</em>. Lakeville, Conn.: International Non-Aristoleian
                Publishing
                Co., 1949.</p>

            <p>LaBarre, Weston. "Hallucinogens and the Origins of Religion," in <em>Flesh of the Gods</em>, ed. Peter T.
                Furst. New York: Frederick Praeger, 1972.</p>

            <p>May, Rollo, Ernest Angel and Henri Ellenberger, eds. <em>Existence</em>. New York: Basic Books, 1958.</p>

            <p>Milne, Loins and Margery. "Will the Environment Defeat Mankind," <em>Harvard Magazine</em>,
                Jan&ndash;Feb.
                1979.</p>

            <p>Pound, Ezra. <em>Selected Prose</em>, 1909&ndash;1965, ed. William Cookson. New York: New Directions,
                1973.
            </p>

            <p>Raglan, Lord. <em>The Hero: A Study in Tradition, Myth and Drama</em>. London: Watts and Co., 1949.</p>

            <p>Reps, Paul. <em>Zen Flesh, Zen Bones</em>. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday. Schultes, Richard E.
                "Hallucinogens
                in the Western Hemisphere," in
                <em>Flesh of the Gods</em>, ed. Peter T. Furst. New York: Frederick Praeger, 1972.
            </p>

            <p>Sears, Paul B. <em>Where There Is Life</em>. New York: Dell, 1970. Simon, George. <em>Notebooks</em>
                1965&ndash;1973, ed. with commentary by Timothy O'Reilly. Watertown, Mass.: Summer
                Publishers, 1976.</p>

            <p>Szasz, Dr. Thomas, with Gov. Jerry Brown and Dr. Lou Simpson. "Nobody Should Decide Who Goes to the
                Mental
                Hospital," <em>Co-Evolution Quarterly</em> 18, Summer 1978.</p>
        </li>
    </ol>
</body>

</html>