<html>
    <body>
        <h1>Introduction: How I Came to Write <em>Frank Herbert</em></h1>
        <p>In the fall of 1977, when I was a couple of years out of college, I received an unexpected call from a friend, Dick
            Riley. He&rsquo;d just landed a new job at a small publisher called Frederick Ungar, as the editor of a series of
            short critical monographs on detective and science-fiction writers. He was looking for authors, and as he knew I was
            fond of science fiction, he thought of me. Would I write a book about Frank Herbert, he wanted to know.</p>
        
        <p>I struggled with his proposal, but eventually decided to give it a try. It was a momentous
            decision, since it was in undertaking the book that I came to think of myself as a writer. (Ironically, it was the
            same day that my programmer friend Peter Brajer asked me to help him rewrite his resume so he could land a job
            writing a manual&mdash;a job that I eventually came to help him with, and which led to our partnership not long
            afterwards.)</p>
        
        <p>I wrote <em>Frank Herbert</em> over a period of about two years, and it was published in 1981. In the course of
            writing it, I read all of Herbert&rsquo;s novels, stories, and essays, as well as a lot of his newspaper writing
            (which, by coincidence, included a stint at the Santa Rosa Press Democrat, the local paper for the region in which I
            now live.) I interviewed him several times, and, in a small way, we became friends. His ideas came to influence me
            deeply. I had always loved <em>Dune</em> and <em>Dune Messiah</em>, and especially the idea that predicting the
            future too closely can lead to a kind of paralysis. But the deeper I went, the more substance I found. Ecology,
            mysticism, and a kind of hard-headed insistence on the relativity of human perception and the limits of knowledge
            combine into a richer mix than is found in a lot of science-fiction. There&rsquo;s some really cool stuff here!</p>
        
        <p>My goal in writing the book was not to be a "critic", but an enthusiast. I wanted to share the additional information
            I&rsquo;d uncovered, to present it in a way that illuminated Herbert&rsquo;s work without diminishing it or
            "dullifying" it. In many ways, this was the same goal I embraced as a technical writer, to bring transparent
            assistance to the reader&rsquo;s own experience, not to replace it with my own.</p>
        
        <p>Like many publishing ventures, Ungar&rsquo;s Recognitions series (as it was called) went largely unrecognized. Ungar
            itself was eventually sold to another publisher, Crossroads/Continuum, and the book went out of print, where it has
            remained for many years. (The last time I remember getting a royalty statement was in the late 80s.)</p>
        
        <p>From time to time, I get letters from people asking if the book is still available, and I&rsquo;ve always had to tell
            them no. (I have just two copies left myself&mdash;one hardcover, the other paperback&mdash;having given away my
            last "extra" just last year, to none other than Jeff Bezos, when I discovered on our trip to Washington that he was
            a big Frank Herbert fan!)</p>
        
        <p>Last year, I wrote to Crossroads/Continuum and asked for a reversion of rights to the book so I could put it up on
            the Web. My letter went unanswered. Since they didn&rsquo;t bother to answer, I decided to go ahead and do it
            anyway, figuring, as they say, that it&rsquo;s sometimes easier to get forgiveness than permission. If anyone from
            Crossroads/Continuum notices, please give me a call or drop an email. I&rsquo;d love to see the book back in print,
            or if not, at least to have your blessing on this Web version.</p>
        
        <p>I hope those of you who are Frank Herbert fans will enjoy the book, and that those of you who are not (yet) will give
            his books a try. In addition, a few years later, I put together a book with Frank, a collection of his essays called
            <em>The Maker of Dune</em>, which was published by Berkely/Putnam. That too is out of print, but since most of the
            writing in it is Frank Herbert&rsquo;s, not mine, I can&rsquo;t in good conscience pull the same trick of putting it
            up on the Web. You may be able to find a used copy somewhere, or, if enough people care about it, perhaps the
            publisher could be persuaded to put it back into print. (Actually, I suppose that I could put up the interviews,
            which I believe I retained copyright on, but that's a project for another day.)</p>

    </body>
</html>